README.md, before:

[![Go](https://github.com/maxsonBraunLab/gopeaks/actions/workflows/go.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/maxsonBraunLab/gopeaks/actions/workflows/go.yml) ![conda](https://anaconda.org/jakevc/gopeaks/badges/installer/conda.svg)

# README

GoPeaks is a peak caller designed for CUT&TAG/CUT&RUN sequencing data. GoPeaks by default works best with narrow peaks such as H3K4me3 and transcription factors. However, broad epigenetic marks like H3K27Ac/H3K4me1 require different the step, slide, and minwidth parameters. We encourage users to explore the parameters of GoPeaks to analyze their data.

# Configure

Download the latest release using conda: 

```
conda install -c jakevc gopeaks
```

Or download binary asset directly from github: 

```
wget -O gopeaks https://github.com/maxsonBraunLab/gopeaks/releases/download/v1.0.0/gopeaks-linux-amd64
chmod +x gopeaks
```

# Example Usage

```
usage: GoPeaks [-h|--help] [-b|--bam "<value>"] [-c|--control "<value>"]
               [-s|--chromsize "<value>"] [-m|--mdist <integer>] [-r|--minreads
               <integer>] [-p|--pval <float>] [-t|--step <integer>] [-l|--slide
               <integer>] [-w|--minwidth <integer>] [-o|--prefix "<value>"]
               [-v|--version]

               GoPeaks is a peak caller designed for CUT&TAG/CUT&RUN sequencing
               data. GoPeaks by default works best with narrow peaks such as
               H3K4me3 and transcription factors. However, broad epigenetic
               marks like H3K27Ac/H3K4me1 require different the step, slide,
               and minwidth parameters. We encourage users to explore the
               parameters of GoPeaks to analyze their data.

Arguments:

  -h  --help       Print help information
  -b  --bam        Input BAM file (must be paired-end reads)
  -c  --control    Input BAM file with control signal to be normalized (e.g.
                   IgG, Input)
  -s  --chromsize  Chromosome sizes for the genome if not found in the bam
                   header
  -m  --mdist      Merge peaks within <mdist> base pairs. Default: 150
  -r  --minreads   Test genome bins with at least <minreads> read bins..
                   Default: 15
  -p  --pval       Define significance threshold <pval> with multiple
                   hypothesis correction via Benjamini-Hochberg. Default: 0.05
  -t  --step       Bin size for coverage bins. Default: 100
  -l  --slide      Slide size for coverage bins. Default: 50
  -w  --minwidth   Minimum width (bp) of a peak. Default: 150
  -o  --prefix     Output prefix to write peaks and metrics file. Default:
                   sample
  -v  --version    Print the current GoPeaks version
```


## call peaks on a bam file using an IgG control

```
./gopeaks --bam ../chr1.bam --control chr1_igg.bam -s data/hg38.known.chrom.sizes -o chr1
```

## Output

Two output files are generated each with the output prefix ${prefix}, set to "sample" by default.

    - sample_peaks.bed
    - sample_gopeaks.json

```
head sample_peaks.bed
chr1	9950	10550
chr1	21250	22650
chr1	96050	97050
```

```
cat sample_gopeaks.json
{
	"gopeaks_version": "1.0.0",
	"date": "2021-08-06 11:4:58 AM",
	"elapsed": "1m23.43085221s",
	"prefix": "sample",
	"peak_counts": 4765
}
```

Commit message:

mdist 1000 by default. add --broad flag. update README with rec params.

README.md, after:

[![Go](https://github.com/maxsonBraunLab/gopeaks/actions/workflows/go.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/maxsonBraunLab/gopeaks/actions/workflows/go.yml) ![conda](https://anaconda.org/jakevc/gopeaks/badges/installer/conda.svg)

# GoPeaks

GoPeaks is a peak caller designed for CUT&TAG/CUT&RUN sequencing data. GoPeaks by default works best with narrow peaks such as H3K4me3 and transcription factors. However, broad epigenetic marks like H3K27Ac/H3K4me1 require different the step, slide, and minwidth parameters. We encourage users to explore the parameters of GoPeaks to analyze their data.

# Configure

Download the latest release using conda: 

```
conda install -c jakevc gopeaks
```

Or download binary asset directly from github: 

```
wget -O gopeaks https://github.com/maxsonBraunLab/gopeaks/releases/download/v1.0.0/gopeaks-linux-amd64
chmod +x gopeaks
```

# Example Usage

```
usage: GoPeaks [-h|--help] [-b|--bam "<value>"] [-c|--control "<value>"]
               [-s|--chromsize "<value>"] [-m|--mdist <integer>] [-r|--minreads
               <integer>] [-p|--pval <float>] [-t|--step <integer>] [-l|--slide
               <integer>] [-w|--minwidth <integer>] [-o|--prefix "<value>"]
               [-v|--version]

               GoPeaks is a peak caller designed for CUT&TAG/CUT&RUN sequencing
               data. GoPeaks by default works best with narrow peaks such as
               H3K4me3 and transcription factors. However, broad epigenetic
               marks like H3K27Ac/H3K4me1 require different the step, slide,
               and minwidth parameters. We encourage users to explore the
               parameters of GoPeaks to analyze their data.

Arguments:

  -h  --help       Print help information
  -b  --bam        Input BAM file (must be paired-end reads)
  -c  --control    Input BAM file with control signal to be normalized (e.g.
                   IgG, Input)
  -s  --chromsize  Chromosome sizes for the genome if not found in the bam
                   header
  -m  --mdist      Merge peaks within <mdist> base pairs. Default: 150
  -r  --minreads   Test genome bins with at least <minreads> read bins..
                   Default: 15
  -p  --pval       Define significance threshold <pval> with multiple
                   hypothesis correction via Benjamini-Hochberg. Default: 0.05
  -t  --step       Bin size for coverage bins. Default: 100
  -l  --slide      Slide size for coverage bins. Default: 50
  -w  --minwidth   Minimum width (bp) of a peak. Default: 150
  -o  --prefix     Output prefix to write peaks and metrics file. Default:
                   sample
  -v  --version    Print the current GoPeaks version
```

## Call peaks on a bam file using an IgG control

```
./gopeaks --bam ../chr1.bam --control chr1_igg.bam -s data/hg38.known.chrom.sizes -o chr1
```

## Output

Two output files are generated each with the output prefix ${prefix}, set to "sample" by default.

    - sample_peaks.bed
    - sample_gopeaks.json

```
head sample_peaks.bed
chr1	9950	10550
chr1	21250	22650
chr1	96050	97050
```

```
cat sample_gopeaks.json
{
	"gopeaks_version": "1.0.0",
	"date": "2021-08-06 11:4:58 AM",
	"elapsed": "1m23.43085221s",
	"prefix": "sample",
	"peak_counts": 4765
}
```

## Recommended parameters

| Sequencing Modality                      | Recommended Parameters       |
| ---------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| CUT&TAG or CUT&RUN narrow peaks          | Default parameters           |
| CUT&TAG or CUT&RUN transcription factors | Default parameters           |
| CUT&TAG or CUT&RUN broad peaks           | `--broad` and `--mdist 3000` |
| ATAC-Seq                                 | Default parameters           |
